The automated Lysozyme Quantification Pipeline improves processing speed of immunofluorescence images with comparable results. 

Phillip Silbert, Nathaniel B. Willis, Karen Antunes, Joesph F. Pierre 

Immunofluorescence analysis is a central tool in biomedical research that provides critical insights into cellular function, protein localization, and tissue architecture in health and disease. Quantifying the fluorescent signal is commonly performed by manual region-of-interest (ROI) tracing using validated software like ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). While effective, manual analysis creates a major time bottleneck and may introduce evaluator-dependent variability which requires multiple independent and blinded evaluators to account for. Thus, our primary objective with this study was to develop a transparent, training-free computational workflow that reliably segments ROIs and quantifies fluorescent signal across variable tissue types and image qualities. We hypothesized that a  pipeline rooted in morphological operations using dual-channel cues would produce crypt-level lysozyme intensity measurements comparable to manual analysis while reducing analysis time from hours to seconds per field. To test this hypothesis, we collected ileal immunofluorescent images from ten mice. The ileal tissue was stained with DAPI and an RFP-tagged anti-LYZ antibody to detect lysozyme expression in the crypt cells and we designed the Lysozyme Quantification Pipeline (LQP) to process the images. For each image, LQP detected candidate crypt “seed” regions using a modified morphological gradient (i.e., two-scale dilation difference) followed by watershed-based region growth constrained by noncrypt boundaries. Candidate ROIs were ranked via a weighted score emphasizing in order circularity, area consistency, linear alignment along the gut wall, mean RFP intensity, and center-of-mass consistency; the top five scoring ROIs are reported as putative crypts. To improve image-to-image comparability, RFP signal was normalized relative to DAPI using crypt and noncrypt tissue ratios. To test the accuracy and reliability of LQP, the ten images were manually quantified by two independent evaluators in ImageJ and compared with automated LQP outputs (per-crypt mean intensity, background intensity, and normalized intensity). Across this sample,  the image-level mean crypt RFP intensity normalized to DAPI  produced by LQP was correlated with the same image-level metric computed from manual ImageJ crypt ROIs (Pearson’s r = 0.816, n=13). We also included per-image quality-control renderings and crypt-level summary tables in LQP, enabling rapid and reproducible extraction of crypt lysozyme metrics for downstream statistical analysis. This proof-of-concept study demonstrated that automate crypt identification and lysozyme quantification dramatically improves throughput and standardization for intestinal physiology studies while generating data highly correlated to the validated manual approach. This provides an extensible foundation for other regional immunofluorescence markers that promises to dramatically decrease processing time without sacrificing analytical quality. 